---
title: "The Case For (and Against) Software Engineering Titles"
excerpt: "Should we have them?"
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/austin-distel-mpN7xjKQ_Ns-unsplash.jpg
  teaser: /assets/images/austin-distel-mpN7xjKQ_Ns-unsplash.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.5
  caption: "Photo by [Austin Distel](https://unsplash.com/@austindistel?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)"
tags:
  - Career
toc: true
---

Engineer
 titles roughly represent how much experience an engineer has and also
their responsibility and role in the team. Here are some commonly seen
engineer titles:

- Software Engineer
- Senior Software Engineer
- Staff Software Engineer
- Principle Software Engineer

I
 had an opportunity to work in a few different environments that handle
engineer titles very differently. Today, I would share some of those
experiences as well as some thoughts around this.

# Working In a Small Team

In
 my early career, I worked at a small startup with less than 10
engineers. We all know each other very well. It is clear to us what the
strength and expertise of each individual are. When problems arise, we
naturally know who to reach out to get help.

The
 entire engineering team can be fit in the same meeting room. At lunch,
we all go grab food together around one o’clock. We use a slack channel
#lunchatone to coordinate lunchtime. We sit around a big picnic table,
have lunch, and chat.

We know the company’s goal and mission very well and believe in them. There is hardly any misunderstanding in communications.

In such a small working environment, it simply wouldn’t make sense to distinguish engineer titles.

# From No Titles to With Titles

When the company grows, we naturally start thinking about titles and team structures.

There
 are often multiple projects going on at the same time. And it becomes
harder and harder to keep track of what each individual is working on.
In engineer all-hands meetings, it becomes harder and harder to get
everyone’s attention. For example, there may be a heated discussion
about mobile MVVM architecture between a few engineers who work heavily
on mobile; those who work deep in the backend systems, will simply zone
out and work on their stuff on their laptops.

We
 hire a few executives from some successful startups and big techs. And
we start to copy what other companies are doing. The team is being split
 based on multiple dimensions.

It
 is being split based on business units: a team focusing on revenue, a
team focusing on growth, a team for each product we sell, etc. It is
also being split based on technical domains: iOS team, Android team,
backend team, data team. Lastly, each engineer will also have a title
that reflects their level: junior, senior, principal, etc.

A Software Engineer now becomes Senior Android Software Engineer on the Revenue team, for example.

Splitting
 based on business unit or the technical domain is easy. But splitting
based on level is tricky. How do we know who should be granted which
title? How do we know how many levels should we create? And how do we
define the boundaries of responsibilities and expectations for each
level?

# The Transition Can Be Turmoil

Eventually,
 with a big re-org is done, everyone is landed on a new title,
reflecting their domain and level. Each level also comes with a
page-long description of the responsibilities and expectations.

The
 journey transition is painful and bumpy. It becomes one of the most
disruptive and unstable periods of time that I can remember. Before
then, the turnover rate at the company was essentially 0. Some people
have to move because of family, but they stick with the company working
remotely. But since the re-org, people started leaving.

Some
 of them felt that they are treated unfairly. If you think you are a
bigger contributor but are given a lower title than your peer, then your
 esteem would inevitably get hurt. Regardless of how much you love the
product, the work, or the team, it would be hard to stay if you don’t
think you are getting the recognition that you deserved.

Some
 of them no longer believe in the leadership or the vision of the
company. A great engineer, also a good friend, once said, “Leaders are
not given, but come naturally. For those who are capable and familiar
with the system, others would naturally turn to them for help.” He left
not long after.

After
 all the dust settled down. Those who left are missed. And those who
stayed carried on the journey. With the new team structure and
engineering hierarchy, scaling the workforce becomes a lot easier. As we
 continue to grow, we just need to hire proportionally engineers at
different levels and create more teams.

# Some Problems With Titles

One
 of the biggest drawbacks is that it pigeonholes us into a certain
stereotype with predefined responsibilities and expectations.

In
 meetings, those at a higher level inevitably give more weight to their
ideas and opinions. At the same time, those with lower levels are
sometimes ignored. To a certain extent, it also hurts creativity, as
more courage is now required to express and oppose the ideas of
superiors.

Engineer
 titles nourish top-down engineering culture. Senior engineers focus
more on defining the scope and direction of a project and can sometimes
dictate implementation. On the other hand, junior engineers focus more
on the execution of the predefined tasks.

Recruiting
 become more complicated too. Previously, the question that we need to
answer are: 1) is this person smart; 2) can I work with this person.
Now, some questions that we commonly get asked during interview debrief
are: 1) if this candidate doesn’t meet the bar for senior software
engineer, can we bring them in as junior? 2) which team should this
engineer be onboard into? 3) do we engineer in that team with a more
senior title who can onboard this candidate?

Before
 having engineering titles, we focus more on the overall vision of the
company. There is a strong sense of ownership and a shared goal. With
engineer levels in place, people are still motivated, but with a
different reason. Everyone works hard to get to the next level, which
implies more money, more recognition, and more power. This mindset
change doesn’t happen overnight. But it is inevitable.

Sometimes,
 it creates unnecessary tension and competition among colleagues. If
there are multiple engineers of the same level doing a similarly good
job, they cannot be promoted all at the same time, right? We still want
to maintain a meaningful distribution of engineers at different levels
for a team to operate smoothly.

Previously,
 the sole purpose of work is delivering a great project. Now it is more
important now to make sure others know you delivered the project
successfully. That’s how and when politics start to creep in. Those who
know how to show off their work, get promoted faster.

# How About Engineer Titles Based on Job Functionality?

I
 was once hired as a full-stack engineer. I love the fact that I can
dance between the front end and back end. There is always plenty to
learn and there are always new challenges day in day out. With the
re-org, we have to choose a technology stack to focus on.

The
 benefits are clear, since each individual is now focusing on a smaller
tech stack, we can gain more expertise in certain areas. Front-end
engineers will only have to deal with UIs; backend engineers only have
to work on distributed systems; data engineers only need to think about
data pipeline…

But the drawback is that we now create some artificial boundaries.

It
 creates more dependencies that require more coordination and
communication. This complicates project planning. If one of the two
backend engineer are on vacation, then it can severely impact the
progress of the project.

It
 also makes it harder for engineers to explore other domains. An
engineer may not spend time fixing a problem that he identified, but
instead, create tasks for other engineers who own that domain. It also
discourages horizontal learning and growth. It is fine for those who
want to become experts in one domain. But for those who are keen to
become a system generalist or full-stack engineer, now the door is
closed.

# A Workplace Where Engineer Titles Are Hidden

In
 a recent year or so, I joined another company where engineer titles are
 hidden. The title is considered as privacy just as compensation. The
rule of thumb is that if one is willing to share their level, that’s
fine; if not, we are not supposed to ask.

An
 environment like this is interesting to work in. Every engineer is
empowered. The culture is more bottom-up. You, as an engineer, are
supposed to come up with your own project ideas, identity partners to
collaborate with, and drive them forward.

Of cause, every coin has two sides.

To
 a new member who join a team, it can be very confusing. Without asking
around, you don’t know who is the team lead. Similarly, if you need help
 from another team, it is also hard to know who has the most context.

Since
 project ideas are bottom-up driven, there sometimes can be duplicated
initiatives. Imagine two teams are working on two similar projects, if
they don’t have overlaps, these two projects can go on for a while
before noticing.

Some
 high-level ICs do not have the recognition that they want. They might
change their title to something fancier, either internally or
externally. After all, having a Senior Software Engineer, Staff Software
 Engineer or Principle Software Engineer on your resume just looks so
much better than a plain Software Engineer.

# Conclusion

A
 vast majority of the companies on the planet have a tree-like org-chart
 or some variations of it. I felt lucky that I had the opportunity to
work in a small team where titles are not as important; also a bigger
company that tries its best to promote individual creativity by
purposely hiding engineering titles.

Are
 you in the junction where you are trying to decide whether you should
introduce titles among engineers? There are plenty of pros and cons to
consider. Hopefully, the above can serve as some food of thought.

What do you think about engineer levels and titles? As always, I would love to hear from you too.

{% include published link="https://betterprogramming.pub/f271c20fae9" %}
